Add proposal about primitives to do destination-passing style structure building in compact regions (#7)
tweag/ghc-proposals: proposals/0000-dps-compact.md

---
author: Thomas Bagrel
date-accepted: ""
ticket-url: ""
implemented: ""
---

This proposal is [discussed at this pull request](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/0>).
**After creating the pull request, edit this file again, update the number in
the link, and delete this bold sentence.**

> # Primitives to do destination-passing style structure building in compact regions

Reviewer: Let's make it a little snappier. Something like:

```suggestion
# Primitives for zero-copy compact regions
```

> This proposal introduces necessary tooling in GHC to enable direct data structure building in compact regions, in particular in destination-passing style (DPS), which can be useful both performance and expressivity purpose.

Reviewer: Let's not worry about expressiveness in this proposal. Simple message: you don't want to store data in the regular heap before they are moved to a compact region.

The primitives are unsafe (but no more than `malloc`, which is exposed by Base), but can be given a safe, pure, interface (which happens to use destination passing, but it's not worth discussing in this proposal, at least not at this point).

Tooling is the wrong word. Just say that it introduces primitives. The repetition with the title is not a problem.

Author: Done

## Motivation

[Compact regions](https://github.com/ezyang/compact) have been supported in GHC since 2017; they provide a way to allocate memory in a region that can be garbage-collected all at once instead of being traversed fully by the GC at each collection cycle. Compact regions are useful in some performance-critical use-cases, especially when dealing with large long-lived datasets.

> So far however, there is no way to operate in a compact region directly. One has to first build data structures in the regular GC heap, and then copy them to a compact region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far however, there is no way to allocate in a compact region directly. One has to first build data structures in the regular GC heap, and then copy them to a compact region.
```

> I propose a new compact region RTS primitive, [`compactAddHollow#`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/tweag/ghc/-/compare/master...tbagrel1%2Fdps-compact-regions-prims?from_project_id=1#451725cc4e5d443a3b7c2adcdf224840f953b7e2_3537_3537), that allocates data constructor heap objects directly into a compact region, without setting values for their fields yet. `compactAddHollow#` lets us build structures in an _outside-in_ fashion into a region, bypassing entirely the need for a copy from the GC heap.

Reviewer: You should probably be explicit, here, that you are proposing more than just `compactAddHollow#`.

> I propose a new compact region RTS primitive, [`compactAddHollow#`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/tweag/ghc/-/compare/master...tbagrel1%2Fdps-compact-regions-prims?from_project_id=1#451725cc4e5d443a3b7c2adcdf224840f953b7e2_3537_3537), that can be used to build data structures directly into a compact region, bypassing the need for a copy entirely. `compactAddHollow#` let us build structures in an _outside-in_ fashion, by allocating a specified constructor heap object in the compact region, without setting values for its fields yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I propose a new compact region RTS primitive, [`compactAddHollow#`](https://gitlab.haskell.org/tweag/ghc/-/compare/master...tbagrel1%2Fdps-compact-regions-prims?from_project_id=1#451725cc4e5d443a3b7c2adcdf224840f953b7e2_3537_3537), that can be used to build data structures directly into a compact region, bypassing the need for a copy entirely. `compactAddHollow#` lets us build structures in an _outside-in_ fashion, by allocating a specified constructor heap object in the compact region, without setting values for its fields yet.
```

> The main intent of `compactAddHollow#` is to be encapsulated in a destination-passing style API, where normal functions can receive _write references_, aka _destinations_, pointing to yet-uninitialized fields of the data structures in the compact region and use them to complete the structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main intent of `compactAddHollow#` is to be encapsulated in a pure, memory-safe API, where normal functions can receive _write references_, aka _destinations_, pointing to yet-uninitialized fields of the data structures in the compact region and use them to complete the structures. This can be achieved with linear types as described in <link to article>.
```

> A real-world use case would be a program that parses a large serialized document and keep it in memory during the whole execution. Instead of being parsed into the GC heap, and maybe copied to a compact region afterwards, with this proposal, the document can be parsed directly into the compact region, reducing greatly the time spent in garbage collection. I implemented a parser of S-expression in both naive style and DPS-style-for-compact-regions that are [presented in the **Examples** section](#library-side-more-performant-s-expression-parser) The implementation that deserializes directly into the compact region is up to twice as fast as the traditional version thanks to garbage collection time saved.

Reviewer: This is the first occurrence of “DPS” it needs a definition if you actually need it.

> A real-world use case would be a program that parses a large serialized document and keep it in memory during the whole execution. Instead of being parsed into the GC heap, and maybe copied to a compact region afterwards, thanks to my change, the document can be parsed directly into the compact region, reducing greatly the time spent in garbage collection. I implemented a parser of S-expression in both naive style and DPS-style-for-compact-regions that are [presented in the **Examples** section](#library-side-performance-focused-example-s-expression-parser) The implementation that deserializes directly into the compact region (making use of the changes presented in the proposal) is up to twice as fast as the naive version thanks to garbage collection time saved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A real-world use case would be a program that parses a large serialized document and keep it in memory during the whole execution. Instead of being parsed into the GC heap, and maybe copied to a compact region afterwards, with this proposal, the document can be parsed directly into the compact region, reducing greatly the time spent in garbage collection. I implemented a parser of S-expression in both naive style and DPS-style-for-compact-regions that are [presented in the **Examples** section](#library-side-performance-focused-example-s-expression-parser) The implementation that deserializes directly into the compact region is up to twice as fast as the traditional version thanks to garbage collection time saved.
```

Note that if you just parse once at the beginning of the program, it doesn't account for much performance. A more load-intensive use-case has you parse a lot of documents but retain them for pretty well-defined amounts of time. Such as one-document-per-request on a web server or something like this.

Worth remembering that if the structure is retained for a while, you'll save some time because it's live data which isn't traversed. But you also save time on traversal of the structure at deallocation time (unless you're in a copying region of the GC, which you are the first time around, in which case dead data isn't traversed I believe).

A third way in which this avoids GC time is that nothing is allocated in the nursery. The nursery being full is what triggers a GC, so you expect to trigger GC less often.

I'm not sure it's worth commenting on all of this, but things to keep in mind. In short: we expect fewer, faster garbage collection phases.

> Results are promising enough, and most of the work is done on the library side, so it requires very few changes to GHC (1 RTS primop, 1 compile-time primop, 1 built-in type family, and minor technicalities). On a lesser note, the DPS API that can be built on top of these changes also present expressivity benefits, e.g. efficient breadth-first traversal of a tree structure, or tail-recursive `map` implementation on lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Results are promising enough, and most of the work is done on the library side, so it requires very few changes to GHC (1 RTS primop, 1 compile-time primop, 1 built-in type family, and minor technicalities). On a lesser note, the DPS API that can be built on top of these changes also present expressiveness benefits, e.g. efficient breadth-first traversal of a tree structure, or tail-recursive `map` implementation on lists.
```

I'm not sure if the bit about expressiveness really belongs in the motivation section. Doesn't matter terribly either way.

The GHC branch that implements the changes described in the proposal is available [here](https://gitlab.haskell.org/tweag/ghc/-/tree/tbagrel1/dps-compact-regions-prims?ref_type=heads) ([diff](https://gitlab.haskell.org/tweag/ghc/-/compare/master...tbagrel1%2Fdps-compact-regions-prims?from_project_id=1)).

## Proposed Change Specification

1. [Allocate hollow data constructor in region: RTS primop `compactAddHollow#`](#allocate-hollow-data-constructor-in-region-rts-primop-compactaddhollow)
2. [Retrieving info table pointer of a constructor: primtype `InfoTablePtrOf#` and compile-time primop `reifyInfoTablePtr#`](#retrieving-info-table-pointer-of-a-constructor-primtype-infotableptrof-and-compile-time-primop-reifyinfotableptr)
3. [Obtain data constructor name as a `Symbol`: `LiftedCtorToSymbol` built-in type family](#obtain-data-constructor-name-as-a-symbol-liftedctortosymbol-built-in-type-family)

### Allocate hollow data constructor in region: RTS primop `compactAddHollow#`

> The new RTS primitive `compactAddHollow#` allocates space for a new constructor heap object in the specified compact region, set its header with the supplied info table pointer, but doesn't set any of its fields (so the constructor is said _hollow_). The user is responsible for setting the fields of the constructor heap object before reading it. The primitive returns the newly allocated constructor heap object, but also the size of the header of the object, and the size of the words on the platform so that the user can later set the fields of the returned object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new RTS primitive `compactAddHollow#` allocates space for a new constructor heap object in the specified compact region, set its header with the supplied info table pointer, but doesn't set any of its fields (so the constructor is said to be _hollow_). The user is responsible for setting the fields of the constructor heap object before reading it. The primitive returns the newly allocated constructor heap object, but also the size of the header of the object, and the size of the words on the platform so that the user can later set the fields of the returned object.
```

```haskell
compactAddHollow#
  :: Compact#         -- ^ the compact region where the constructor heap object will be added
  -> Addr#            -- ^ the info table pointer that will be set as header for the new constructor heap object
  -> State# RealWorld -- ^ state token
  -> (# State# RealWorld
      , a             -- ^ the allocated constructor heap object
      , Word#         -- ^ size of the header of the allocated heap object, in bytes

>       , Word#         -- ^ size of the words, in bytes, on the platform

Reviewer: An alternative to discuss is to make this word size a primitive, so that you don't have to return it.

This primitive must be implemented in the RTS (in `rts/Compact.cmm`). The behavior of its Cmm code should correspond to these macro steps:

```c
stg_compactAddHollowzh(
  P_ compact, // the compact region where the constructor heap object will be added
  W_ info     // the info table pointer that will be set as header for the new constructor heap object
) {
  [...]
  // find address where to store the pointer to the new constructor object
  pp = compact + SIZEOF_StgHeader + OFFSET_StgCompactNFData_result;
  // reuse existing macro to allocate inside the compact region
  ALLOCATE(compact, size, p, new_ctor_obj, tag);
  // write the supplied info table pointer
  SET_HDR(new_ctor_obj, info, CCS_SYSTEM);
  // store the pointer to the new constructor in the return location
  P_[pp] = new_ctor_obj;
  [...]

  return (P_[pp], SIZEOF_StgHeader, SIZEOF_W);
}

> ```

Reviewer: This doesn't belong to the specification. Move to the _Costs_ section.

Author: I removed it altogether in exchange for more precise phrasing in the _Specification_ section, I don't think it would be useful in _Costs_ or _Implementation_ sections.

> `compactAddHollow#` allocates space for a new constructor heap object in the compact region, but doesn't set any of its fields (so it is _hollow_). It only sets its header with the supplied info table pointer. The user is responsible for setting the fields of the constructor heap object before reading it. The primitive returns the newly allocated constructor heap object, but also the size of the header of the object, and the size of the words on the platform so that the user can later set the fields of the returned object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new primitive, `compactAddHollow#`, which allocates space for a new constructor heap object in the compact region, but doesn't set any of its fields (so it is _hollow_). It only sets its header with the supplied info table pointer. The user is responsible for setting the fields of the constructor heap object before reading it. The primitive returns the newly allocated constructor heap object, but also the size of the header of the object, and the size of the words on the platform so that the user can later set the fields of the returned object.
```

Move to the top of the section. Exercise: remove all the occurrences of the word ”it” in this paragraph.

By the way, did you look at successful proposals which add primops, such as: [Delimited continuation primops](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0313-delimited-continuation-primops.rst) or [sumToTag#](https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/blob/master/proposals/0369-sum-to-tag.rst)? For inspiration about the style and tone.

### Retrieving the info table pointer: primtype `InfoTablePtrOf#` and compile-time primop `reifyInfoTablePtr#`

> `compactAddHollow#` is in charge of allocating the constructor heap object in the compact region, but it doesn't have access to the info table pointer for the constructor. All information about info tables has long been inlined/erased at runtime. So we need a primitive `reifyInfoTablePtr#` to reify the info table pointer of a given constructor at compile-time into a static value that the RTS can then use.

Reviewer: Not “is in charge” tell us what it does/means. This section is a specification. Explanations of how these primitive interact go in the _Example_ and _Effects and interactions_ section.

Author: I moved it. I hope that the readers will still understand why I propose this specific set of changes. It's a bit weird to justify the changes  much after I first specify them.

New built-in type family `LiftedCtorToSymbol` translates a data constructor lifted as a type into the `Symbol` corresponding to its _occurence name_.

```haskell
type family LiftedCtorToSymbol (liftedCtor :: k) :: Symbol
```

> Expected behavior:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

We pass the desired data constructor as a type to `reifyInfoTablePtr#`, using type ascription for the return value:

```haskell
let leftInfoPtr :: InfoTablePtrOf# 'Left = reifyInfoTablePtr# (# #)
```

> `reifyInfoTablePtr#` is a compile-time primops (i.e. substituted with actual Cmm code in the _Stg to Cmm_ phase). It inspects the type of its return value (which is accessible in the code generation pipeline for compile-time primops `emitPrimOp`):

Reviewer: Move to the _Costs_ section.

Author: Removed it, it doesn't bring much info.

- if it is of shape `InfoTablePtrOf# 〈s〉`, where `〈s〉` is a `Symbol`, it returns the info table pointer for the Stg object `stg_〈s〉`

> - if it is of shape `InfoTablePtrOf# '〈d〉`, where `〈d〉` is a data constructor, it returns the info table pointer for data constructor `〈d〉`

Reviewer: I guess `reifyInfoTablePtr#` doesn't “return” since this all happens at compile time. It is, rather, “compiled into”, isn't it?

Author: Changed.

- otherwise, it raises a compile-time error (I've yet to find how to do that in practice)

> Defining `reifyInfoTablePtr#` requires support for kind-polymorphic type variables in primop generation. I include the following changes in the proposal, following what has been done for levity-polymorphic type variables:

Reviewer: Is this user-facing? Or is it an implementation thing? If it's an implementation thing, move to the _Costs_ section.

Author: Moved it.

```haskell
kind1TyVar, kind2TyVar :: TyVar
(kind1TyVar : kind2TyVar : _)
  = mkTemplateKindVars (repeat liftedTypeKind)

kind1TyVarInf, kind2TyVarInf :: TyVarBinder
kind1TyVarInf = mkTyVarBinder Inferred kind1TyVar
kind2TyVarInf = mkTyVarBinder Inferred kind2TyVar

kind1Ty, kind2Ty :: Type
kind1Ty = mkTyVarTy kind1TyVar
kind2Ty = mkTyVarTy kind2TyVar

kindPolyAlphaTyVar, kindPolyBetaTyVar :: TyVar
[kindPolyAlphaTyVar, kindPolyBetaTyVar] =
  mkTemplateTyVars
    [ kind1Ty
    , kind2Ty]

kindPolyAlphaTyVarSpec, kindPolyBetaTyVarSpec :: TyVarBinder
kindPolyAlphaTyVarSpec = mkTyVarBinder Specified kindPolyAlphaTyVar
kindPolyBetaTyVarSpec  = mkTyVarBinder Specified kindPolyBetaTyVar

kindPolyAlphaTy, kindPolyBetaTy :: Type
kindPolyAlphaTy = mkTyVarTy kindPolyAlphaTyVar
kindPolyBetaTy  = mkTyVarTy kindPolyBetaTyVar
```

### Obtain data constructor name as a `Symbol`: `LiftedCtorToSymbol` built-in type family

```haskell
type family LiftedCtorToSymbol (liftedCtor :: k) :: Symbol
```

> When making an API around `compactAddHollow#`, we need to know the number and type of the fields that the constructor has. That information can be easily retrieved with `GHC.Generics`. However, the type-level structure returned by `GHC.Generics` distinguishes constructors of a given type by their name, as a `Symbol`.

Reviewer: Move to _Effects and interactions_.

Author: Moved it.

As in the previous example, we reify the info table pointer for the `stg_IND` object, and then allocate a hollow `stg_IND` object in the compact region. Same can be done with other special STG objects.

#### Get info about fields of a data constructor using `GHC.Generics` and `LiftedCtorToSymbol`

> Here I present how to extract information about a data constructor (number and type of its fields, among others) in a type-level structure, starting from its type-level (lifted) representation and the type `a` that it belongs to. The type should implement `Generic` (i.e. `Rep a ()` should reduce).

Reviewer: You should explain why you can't easily do that without your new type family.

> For example:

Reviewer: These examples are in the right place, on the other hand.

> LiftedCtorToSymbol 'Left ~ "Left"

Reviewer: Is it `"Left"` (the _occurrence name_) or `"Data.Either.Left"` (the _original name_)?

Author: I just want the unqualified name of a constructor, as it is what GHC.Generics use.

_Occurence name_, despite what its name suggest, seems to be invariable even when the constructor is used (partially) qualified:

```
> import Data.Either as D
> :kind! LiftedCtorToSymbol 'D.Left`
"Left"
```

So _occurence name_ seems to be the right choice for the proposal :+1:

This type-level machinery first use `LiftedCtorToSymbol` to get the name of the specified data constructor as a `Symbol`, and then uses it to filter the generic representation `Rep a ()`.

> We assume existence of type-level `(++)`, `(<|>)` and `FromJust :: Maybe k -> k operators`

Reviewer: I think I know what you intend for these to mean, but you can't assume that the reader knows.

```haskell
LiftedCtorToSpecCtor '〈d〉 ~ "〈d〉"

> ```

Reviewer: Honestly, this example isn't clear (it's not even really an example). Just spell out the semantics in English, using the GHC terminology (occurrence name and original name, as above).

Author: Removed it.

> type family LiftedCtorToSpecCtor lCtor (a :: Type) :: (Meta, [(Meta, Type)]) where

Reviewer: I think you should simplify the example down even more and just compute, say, the number of fields.

## Proposed Library Change Specification

- `compactAddHollow#`, `reifyInfoTablePtr#`, and `InfoTablePtrOf#` are exposed in `GHC.Prim`
- `LiftedCtorToSymbol` is exposed in `GHC.TypeLits`

## Examples

### Primitive usage

#### Allocate a hollow `Left` constructor in region `compactRegion`

```haskell
let leftInfoPtr :: InfoTablePtrOf# 'Left = reifyInfoTablePtr# (# #)
 in compactAddHollow# compactRegion (unsafeCoerceAddr leftInfoPtr) state
```

> Yet unspecified fields can later be assigned with existing primop `writeAddrOffAddr#` (we know the offsets of the fields thanks to the return type of `compactAddHollow#`).

Reviewer: Remove the parenthetical remark
```suggestion
Yet unspecified fields can later be assigned with existing primop `writeAddrOffAddr#`.
```

Replace it by extending the example so that it uses the offsets.

Author: I extended the example as requested. It's fairly more complex now, I hope it's still readable.

#### Allocate hollow `stg_IND` object in region `compactRegion`

```haskell
let indInfoPtr :: InfoTablePtrOf# "IND" = reifyInfoTablePtr# (# #)
 in compactAddHollow# compactRegion (unsafeCoerceAddr indInfoPtr) state
```

> #### Get info about fields of a data constructor using `GHC.Generics` and `LiftedCtorToSymbol`

Reviewer: This is a hefty example. It takes a while to even find where the stuff from the proposal shows up. Can we find a shorter example? (maybe the same example but skipping some cases?)

Author: I cut down the example a bit, and added comments. I think it reads better now, let me know :)

  GSlotTypeOf (K1 _ c _) = c
  GSlotTypeOf (M1 _ _ f p) = GSlotTypeOf (f p)
  GSlotTypeOf _ = TypeError ('Text "No match for GSlotTypeOf")

type family GSpecCtorOf (symCtor :: Symbol) (repA :: Type) :: Maybe (Meta, [(Meta, Type)]) where
  GSpecCtorOf symCtor (C1 ('MetaCons symCtor x y) f p) = 'Just '(('MetaCons symCtor x y), GFieldsOf (f p))
  GSpecCtorOf symCtor (C1 ('MetaCons _ _ _) _ _) = 'Nothing
  GSpecCtorOf symCtor ((f :+: g) p) = GSpecCtorOf symCtor (f p) <|> GSpecCtorOf symCtor (g p)
  GSpecCtorOf symCtor (V1 _) = 'Nothing
  GSpecCtorOf symCtor (M1 _ _ f p) = GSpecCtorOf symCtor (f p)
  GSpecCtorOf _ _ = TypeError ('Text "No match for GSpecCtorOf")

type family LiftedCtorToSpecCtor lCtor (a :: Type) :: (Meta, [(Meta, Type)]) where
  LiftedCtorToSpecCtor lCtor a = FromJust (GSpecCtorOf (LiftedCtorToSymbol lCtor) (Rep a ()))
```

This type-level machinery first use `LiftedCtorToSymbol` to get the name of the specified data constructor as a `Symbol`, and then uses it to filter the generic representation of the associated type. That way, `LiftedCtorToSpecCtor` can go from a lifted data constructor to a type-level list of its fields with their metadata and type.

> ### Library side, simple example

Reviewer: This is a nice example of the DPS library. But I'm not sure that it's too relevant here. None of your changes happen. The S-expression example is good because you point to the paper and explain the results, no distraction.

Author: I cut down the example a little. But I would like to keep it in the proposal.

              `lseq` (case fill @'MkAddress dA of
                        (dNo, dSt, dC, dZ) ->
                          fillLeaf 42 dNo
                            `lseq` fillLeaf "Elm Street" dSt
                            `lseq` fillLeaf "Springwood" dC
                            `lseq` fillLeaf 12345 dZ
                      )
          )
      expected :: IdCard
      expected = MkIdCard "John Doe" (MkAddress 42 "Elm Street" "Springwood" 12345)
  assertEqual "John Doe ID is the same in both building schemes" expected actual
```

The syntax looks quite verbose compared to naive structure building, because the API is designed to allow efficient structure building, little-by-little, from dynamic data, instead of building the whole structure at once from static data (where it is no more efficient than a copy using existing `compactAdd#`).

The API uses linear types to ensure (at compile-time) that every field of the data structure is wrote to exactly once before the structure can be read. More details on the API can be found in this [JFLA 2024 article](https://inria.hal.science/hal-04406360/document) and [this blog post](https://www.tweag.io/blog/2024-03-07-dps-haskell/).

> ### Library side: more performant S-expression parser

Reviewer: I think I already said that, but I don't think this should be in the example section, it should be in the effect section.

> [I implemented a S-expression parser]((https://github.com/tweag/linear-base/blob/93dd7769d86a4c918934be110151faf382a35f38/examples-version-changes/ghc-dps-compact/after/Compact/SExpr.hs)) in two different fashions: the first one `parseWithoutDest` deserializes into the usual GC heap, and the second `parseWithDest` uses this proposal's primitives (via the [aforementioned safe library-side API](https://github.com/tweag/linear-base/pull/450)) to directly deserialize data into a compact region. Here's the benchmark for a 4MB S-expression file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[I implemented an S-expression parser]((https://github.com/tweag/linear-base/blob/93dd7769d86a4c918934be110151faf382a35f38/examples-version-changes/ghc-dps-compact/after/Compact/SExpr.hs)) in two different fashions: the first one `parseWithoutDest` deserializes into the usual GC heap, and the second `parseWithDest` uses this proposal's primitives (via the [aforementioned safe library-side API](https://github.com/tweag/linear-base/pull/450)) to directly deserialize data into a compact region. Here's the benchmark for a 4MB S-expression file:
```

              `lseq` (case fill @'MkDate dDob of
                        (dD, dM, dY) ->
                          fillLeaf 1 dD
                            `lseq` fillLeaf 1 dM
                            `lseq` fillLeaf 1970 dY
                      )
          )
      expected :: IdCard
      expected = MkIdCard "John Doe" (MkAddress 42 "Elm Street" "Springwood" 12345) (MkDate 1 1 1970)
  assertEqual "John Doe ID is the same in both building schemes" expected actual
```

The syntax looks very verbose compared to naive structure building, because the API is designed to allow efficient structure building, little-by-little, from dynamic data, instead of building the whole structure at once from static data (where it is no more efficient than a copy using existing `compactAdd#`).

The API uses linear types to ensure (at compile-time) that every field of the data structure is wrote to exactly once before the structure can be read. More details on the API can be found in this [JFLA 2024 article](https://inria.hal.science/hal-04406360/document) and [this blog post](https://www.tweag.io/blog/2024-03-07-dps-haskell/).

### Library side, performance-focused example: S-expression parser

> [I implemented a S-expression parser]((https://github.com/tweag/linear-base/blob/93dd7769d86a4c918934be110151faf382a35f38/examples-version-changes/ghc-dps-compact/after/Compact/SExpr.hs)) in two different fashions: the first one deserializes into the usual GC heap, and the second uses the DPS API to directly deserialize data into a compact region. Here's the benchmark for a 4MB S-expression file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[I implemented a S-expression parser]((https://github.com/tweag/linear-base/blob/93dd7769d86a4c918934be110151faf382a35f38/examples-version-changes/ghc-dps-compact/after/Compact/SExpr.hs)) in two different fashions: the first one deserializes into the usual GC heap, and the second uses this proposal's primitives (via a safe API) to directly deserialize data into a compact region. Here's the benchmark for a 4MB S-expression file:
```

> Primitive `compactAddHollow#` allow for direct allocation in a compact region, without copy, as stated in the [Motivation](#motivation) section. It needs to be combined with `reifyInfoTablePtr#` to properly allocate requested constructor objects with the right info table pointer, because as a RTS primitive, `compactAddHollow#` doesn't have access itself to the info table pointer to set for the constructor (all information about info tables has long been inlined/erased when the primitive is actually executed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `compactAddHollow#` primitive allows for direct allocation in a compact region, without copy, as stated in the [Motivation](#motivation) section. It needs to be combined with `reifyInfoTablePtr#` to properly allocate requested constructor objects with the right info table pointer, because as a RTS primitive, `compactAddHollow#` doesn't have access itself to the info table pointer to set for the constructor (all information about info tables has long been inlined/erased when the primitive is actually executed).
```

> `compactAddHollow#` is more unsafe than existing `compactAdd#` and `compactAddWithSharing#` primitives, but as are many primitives from `GHC.Prim`. That being said, the compact region guarantees wrt. the garbage collector should be enough to ensure a defined behavior for any program using this new primitive.

Reviewer: Not if you explicitly read from unallocated memory, though. You just know that the GC isn't going to mess your game up.

```

(`***`_The  program only parses the document and then shutdowns, so in a real-world use case doing something non trivial with the parsed data, the time spent by the GC traversing the parsed dataset again and again in `parseWithoutDest (parse into GC heap, stay in GC heap` would be significantly more important._)

Unlike the previous example, here the code for the parser is very similar and equally verbose for both the naive and DPS version, so there isn't much extra effort needed to get these performance benefits.

## Effect and Interactions

Primitive `compactAddHollow#` allow for direct allocation in a compact region, without copy, as stated in the [Motivation](#motivation) section. It needs to be combined with `reifyInfoTablePtr#` to properly allocate well-formed constructor objects with the right info table pointer. The pair is flexible enough to allow destination-passing style programming in Haskell, which allows for implementation of all examples presented above.

I don't think the proposed changes will have any specific interaction with other GHC features. The implementation of the new primitives makes very little assumptions on the existing internals of GHC.

> reifyInfoTablePtr#` and `LiftedCtorToSymbol` are not harmful in any way; they reduces to a static value at compile time or raise a compile-time error.
> 

Reviewer: You don't need to say this
```suggestion
```

`compactAddHollow#` is a bit more dangerous, as it allows for creation of a constructor object in a compact region that should not be read without further modification, and that shouldn't be moved either (or that would invalidate the pointers that the user will use to write to its fields). In that sense, it is more unsafe than existing `compactAdd#` and `compactAddWithSharing#` primitives. That being said, the compact region guarantees wrt. the garbage collector should be enough to ensure defined behavior of a program using this new primitive.

The library code makes many assumptions on the representation of Haskell heap objects, but it isn't in the perimeter of this proposal.

## Costs and Drawbacks

The changes in this proposal should have a very minimal impact on GHC maintenance. The changes are quite localized.

## Backward Compatibility

0. No breakage should be expected for existing code.

## Alternatives

> The pair of primops `compactAddHollow#` and `reifyInfoTablePtr#` are made to work together, and I don't see any alternative design than a 2-stage process (compile-time and then runtime) to effectively allocate a chosen constructor object in a compact region without a copy. I didn't feel like I had to do many choices when designing these, but I'm still listening to feedback and alternative ideas.
> 
> The rest of the proposal however has more room for alternatives. I listed the few that came to my mind:

Reviewer: You don't need to answer to questions that don't exist. Simply list alternative designs and explains why you chose what you chose, or at least places where questions can arise and something can be answered.
```suggestion
```

1. [More intuitive signature for `reifyInfoTablePtr#` primitive](#more-intuitive-signature-for-reifyinfotableptr-primitive)
2. [Replace `LiftedCtorToSymbol` with a type family that directly returns the type-level list of fields of the constructor](#replace-liftedctortosymbol-with-a-type-family-that-directly-returns-the-type-level-list-of-fields-of-the-constructor)
3. [Remove `LiftedCtorToSymbol` built-in typeclass entirely](#remove-liftedctortosymbol-built-in-typeclass-entirely)
4. [Integrate the library code for safe DPS structure building into GHC](#integrate-the-library-code-for-safe-dps-structure-building-into-ghc)
5. [Add nothing to GHC, and relie on unsafe user-side tricks to achieve roughly the same behavior](#add-nothing-to-ghc-and-relie-on-unsafe-user-side-tricks-to-achieve-roughly-the-same-behavior)

### More intuitive signature for `reifyInfoTablePtr#` primitive

> At the moment, `reifyInfoTablePtr#` is has a rather special signature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`reifyInfoTablePtr#` has a rather counterintuitive signature:
```

```haskell
reifyInfoTablePtr# :: forall k (a :: k). (# #) -> InfoTablePtrOf# a
```

This signature is motivated by the fact that in `emitPrimOp`, we only have access to the type of the return value of the primop, and not to the types of the arguments. So in the current design, I feed the type-level information of the chosen constructor as a (phantom) type argument on the return type of the primop.

It would be clearer to have signature like:

```haskell
reifyInfoTablePtrAlt# :: forall k (a :: k). Proxy# a -> Addr#
```

> but that would require more important restructuration of the primop code generation pipeline, and I don't think it's worth it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but that would require more important restructuring of the primop code generation pipeline, and I don't think it's worth it.
```

### Replace `LiftedCtorToSymbol` with a type family that directly returns the type-level list of fields of the constructor

> `LiftedCtorToSymbol` is only used as a way to extract information about a constructor's fields from the `GHC.Generics` representation of the associated type. We could device a typeclass that does all of that directly into the compiler, without requiring `GHC.Generics`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`LiftedCtorToSymbol` is only used as a way to extract information about a constructor's fields from the `GHC.Generics` representation of the associated type. We could devise a typeclass that does all of that directly into the compiler, without requiring `GHC.Generics`.
```

I expect that it would require to sort of reimplement part of `GHC.Generics` somewhere else in the compiler. I haven't looked into that yet.

### Remove `LiftedCtorToSymbol` built-in typeclass entirely

With the proposed changes, the library code can have syntax like

```haskell
fill @'MkIdCard d
```

and still recover information about `MkIdCard` from the `GHC.Generics` representation of `IdCard`.

Without the new built-in typeclass, the syntax would become:

```haskell

> fill @'MkIdCard @"MkIdCard" d

Reviewer: Could it be `fill @IdCard @"MkIdCard"` instead? Still not great, but at least not repetitive.

Author: If `fill` no longer receive the constructor lifted as a type (`'Left`), then we need to implement the resolution `(name :: Symbol, baseType :: Type) -> DataCon` inside `reifyInfoTablePtr#`. That means a more complex `reifyInfoTablePtr#`, with little advantage (still 2 type parameters to supply)

Because I couldn't allocate hollow constructors directly into the region, I would use `GHC.Generics` to allocate a chosen constructor in the normal GC heap, with fields set to a unsafe-casted `()` value. Then I would copy the constructor to the compact region using existing primops, and use `writeAddrOffAddr#` to set the fields of the constructor in the compact region later.

I don't think relying on these tricks is a good idea though if we want to officially support direct structure building in compact regions. First, the copy is still less efficient than allocation + setting the header as in `compactAddHollow#`. Secondly, it was much more difficult to make the code generic for all data types; I had to write specific versions of `fill` functions for each constructor I wanted to support. Finally, the code was much less safe, as I had to rely on unsafe coercions and unsafe casts to make it work.

## Unresolved Questions

1. I want `reifyInfoTablePtr#` to raise a compile-time error when the type argument it inspects doesn't have the right shape. I'm not sure how to do that yet.

> 2. How `LiftedCtorToSymbol` should behave when it is given a type that doesn't correspond to a data constructor lifted as a type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. How should `LiftedCtorToSymbol` behave when it is given a type that doesn't correspond to a data constructor lifted as a type.
```
